---
layout: post
title: OCTF 2022 EZVM Writeup
date: 2023-01-05 15:09:00
description: Solving the EZVM challenge from 0CTF 2022
tags: 
categories: 
---

Its been some time since I wrote one of these, so I might be a little rusty.
Do bear with me.

I wasn't able to play 0CTF 2022 in full while it was going on but I was helping one of my teammates (@zolutal) who was trying to solve this challenge.
I had briefly tried to reverse engineer the binary but didn't have enough time to analyze it completely.

## Step 1: Reversing
<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/main.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

The main function doesn't do much except for that 256 byte long buffer which I thought might be useful in case we needed to fill some constraints for a one-gadget. But I did not end up using that approach.


The `do_main` function does more interesting stuff by comparison
<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/do_main.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

During my hasty reverse engineering process, I ended up naming the allocation at line 24 as `registers` even though the program was basically telling me it was called `memory`. So for the rest of this blog, I'll refer to this allocated region as `memory` even though my decompiled code says `registers`.

The comparison at line 17 stands out pretty well as a possible location for a bug, but I was more interested in reversing the other functions.


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/init_vm.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

Init VM clears all of the data before executing the code. However, since it uses `malloc`, some of the data on the heap might still be present and available for reuse.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/run_vm.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

And now we get to the actual VM part.

There's quite a lot of switch cases here.
Each instruction is apparently one byte and the VM follows a stack based model.
Which means that for an arithmetic operation, two values on the top of the stack are popped off and the result is pushed back on to the stack.

The program does make sure that the stack does not overflow or underflow.

Line 27 in the above screenshot looked a bit weird to me since it checks if `operand1` is lesser than 4 and then adds 4 to it while dereferencing.

However, looking at the memory layout, it makes more sense.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/memory.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

Like I had mentioned earlier, the `regs` variable that I had named is actually supposed to be called `memory`.

The VM maintains its own 4 registers each of which is 8 bytes long.
These registers are referred to in the decompiled code as `internal_array`.
And so we have

{% highlight c %}
&regs[4+x] == &internal_array[x]
{% endhighlight %}

This makes the reverse engineering much more understandable.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/jump.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

The VM even supports jump instructions.
Although it does make sure that the program counter does not go beyond the bounds of the code section.

## Step 2: The Bug
I wasn't able to find the bug here, but @zolutal found it.

There are two bugs here that combine together to provide an arbitrary 8-byte write.


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/vuln.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

In line 156, the variable `op2_` is an 8 byte value that we can control.
So if it is large enough, it can index memory outside the chunk allocated in the `regs` variable.

However, in order to do that, it must first pass the check at line 154.

This is where the second bug comes in.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/do_main_vuln.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

These lines inside the `do_main` function allow us to set the `regs_size` variable in the `run_vm` function to any value up to 0x2000000000000000 (or 1 << 61 )

However, when the allocation happens at the `malloc`, this value is multiplied with 8.

{% highlight python %}
In [6]: hex(((0x2000000000000000 + 0x10) * 8) & (2**64 - 1))
Out[6]: '0x80'
{% endhighlight %}

Therefore, when we request an allocation of size 0x2000000000000000 + 0x10, the multiplication overflows into a value 0x80 which is the size of the buffer that `malloc` allocates.

Now, in `run_vm`, the `regs_size` is 0x2000000000000000 + 0x10 which allows us to write to memory out of the bounds of the `regs` buffer.

However, in the switch case number 22 in `run_vm`, we cannot use this idea to get an arbitrary read.
This is because the comparison in line 162 will first multiply the `regs_size` by 8 and then divide the result by 8.

{% highlight python %}
In [10]: hex((((0x2000000000000000 + 0x10) * 8) & (2**64 - 1))// 8)
Out[10]: '0x10'
{% endhighlight %}

This means that we cannot use this functionality to get an arbitrary read.

## Step 3: The Exploit

Up until now, the only primitives we had was an arbitrary write.
Moreover, we can only trigger this arbitrary overwrite in a single VM after which we cannot reuse it again.

With some heap massaging, we can free tcache and smallbin chunks which leave some useful pointers on the heap.
But since the VM does not write any content out, we were not able to figure out a way to leak these pointers.

One of the ideas that I had was to perform some heap fengshui to position the code buffer after the memory buffer.
If we could do that, we could use the arbitrary overwrite to overwrite some values in the code with the pointers that were on the heap.
This would've been a crazy solution, but it eventually did not work out.

And we actually did not solve this challenge during the CTF.

## Step 4: Yansquad

I forgot about this challenge after some time.
But then it showed up in one of the classes that I'm taking here at ASU.

CSE 598 Topic: Emerging Cybersecurity Techniques taken by none other than @zardus involved us playing CTF's and solving challenges together in class.

In this class, every week, one student is responsible for picking a challenge from a CTF, deconstructing to its most basic concept and creating a simplified version of the challenge.
This one week, it was @clasm's turn to present a challenge and he chose this one.

The simplified version of the challenge provided all the primitives you could ask for in a heap exploitation challenge.
And the objective was to learn how to overwrite the `tls_dtors_list` to get PC control.

I'll put up the files for this challenge as soon as @clasm lets me know its okay to.

But once I had solved the simplified one, I wanted to give another go at the original challenge.

## Step 5: The Leak

This time I noticed something that I had missed.
A sidechannel for leaking pointers.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/side_channel.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

This switch case (which I called the `nop` case) would print a string "what??" when hit.

Now, if I can write the code for the VM to perform some checks on the pointers and jump to a `nop` instruction if true, I will be able to leak pointers.

## Step 6: The Assembly

I really did not want to write bytecode and deal with jump offsets (although maybe it would've been faster).

So I ended up writing an assembler for this VM that supports labels and loops.
It would replace labels with a `nop` instruction.

{% highlight python %}
from assembler import *


def run_vm(prog, mem_count, msg):
    assembler = Assembler(prog)
    code = assembler.assemble(debug=False) 
    p.sendlineafter(b"Please input your code size:\n", b"%d" % len(code))
    p.sendlineafter(b"Please input your memory count:\n", b"%d" % mem_count)
    p.sendafter(b"Please input your code:\n", code)
    out = p.recvuntil(b"finish!\n")
    p.sendlineafter(b"continue?\n", msg)
    return out
{% endhighlight %}


I then wrote assembly code that increments a counter from zero in a loop until it becomes equal to one byte of a pointer.
In each loop, this program will hit a `nop` which will make the program print the string "what??".
And upon counting the number of these strings printed out, I can get the value of this one byte.

{% highlight python %}
def leak(p, mem_size, num_bytes):
    leak_byte = """
lq r0 0
push r0
li r3 {byte_idx}
push r3
shr
pop r3
push r3
li r1 0xff
push r1
and
pop r1
li r2 0x1
.loop
push r1
push r2
sub
pop r1
push r1
jnz .loop
hlt
    """
    leaked_bytes = []
    for x in range(num_bytes):
        prog = leak_byte.format(byte_idx=x*8)
        output = run_vm(prog, mem_size, b"B"*10).decode("utf-8").strip()
        leaked_byte = output.split("\n").count("what???")
        leaked_bytes = [leaked_byte] + leaked_bytes

    leaked_addr = 0
    for x in leaked_bytes:
        leaked_addr = (leaked_addr << 8) + x

    log.success(f"Leaked value : {hex(leaked_addr)}")
    return leaked_addr
{% endhighlight %}


## Step 7: The Target

In the version of libc that the challenge uses (libc-2.35), the usual suspects for PC control such as `__free_hook` and `__malloc_hook` have been removed.

But then there's some code that always gets invoked when the program exits.
Namely the `__run_exit_handlers()`

This function calls `__call_tls_dtors()` which walks a linked list called `tls_dtor_list` and executes the functions specified by each object's function pointer.


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/tls.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

Since we have an arbitrary overwrite, we can overwrite one entry in the linked list to point to an area we control.
And with that, we can force the `__call_tls_dtors()` function to call a function pointer that we control.

So then my plan for exploit was as follows
<ul>
    <li>Heap fengshui to get a heap pointer in the memory buffer</li>
    <li>Leak pointer to get heap leak</li>
    <li>Heap fengshui to get a libc pointer in the memory buffer</li>
    <li>Leak pointer to get libc leak</li>
    <li>Create fake <code>tls_dtor_list</code> object on heap</li>
    <li>Overwrite <code>tls_dtor_list</code> with the fake object</li>
    <li>????</li>
    <li>Profit</li>
</ul>

We do have to take care of a pesky `PTR_DEMANGLE` macro which is basically a right shift followed by an xor.
However, an easy way to fix it is to overwrite the xor key with 0.

And putting it all together:

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/ezvm/pwned.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

The final exploit is available here: <a href="/assets/python/ezvm/exploit.py">Exploit</a>

And the assembler is available here: <a href="/assets/python/ezvm/assembler.py">Assembler</a>